`const` expression can borrow static items (#1610)
rust-lang/reference: src/const_eval.md

* [Const parameters].
* [Paths] to [functions] and [constants].
  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.

> * Paths to immutable [statics] with these restrictions and observations.

Reviewer: I think this might still need to be updated, since it allows `static mut`.

```suggestion
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations:
```

Author: Applied

> * Paths to immutable [statics] with these exception with these restrictions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Paths to [statics] with the following restrictions:
```

    * Reads out of and writes into [`extern` statics] are not allowed.
    * Reads out of and writes into either a `static` with data equipped with interior mutability,

>       or a whole or parts of `static mut`, are not allowed.

Reviewer 2: I am confused by the wording here. Why does `static mut` emphasize this "whole or part of", but interior mutable `static` does not? The two are treated exactly the same so they should also be described the same.

The actual underlying check is simply "is this global mutable memory -- if yes, reject read", and "if this memory global -- if yes, reject write".

Reviewer 3: Is this code accepted?
```rust
static FOO: (u8, UnsafeCell<u8>) = (0, UnsafeCell::new(1));

const BAR: u8 = FOO.0;
```

* [Const parameters].
* [Paths] to [functions] and [constants].
  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.

> * Paths to immutable [statics].

Reviewer 2: You can use the path but evaluation will fail. Any attempt to read from a mutable or interior mutable static is an error.

However, if this is dead code, it will get accepted. So this is different from the prior check that just rejected even syntactically mentioning statics.

> * Paths to immutable [statics].

Reviewer: Oh, sorry, my testing is wrong because these errors don't happen with `cargo check` 😦 .

> * Paths to immutable [statics].

Reviewer 2: `const { ... }` blocks don't get evaluated in `cargo check`, yeah. `const` *items* do.

* [Const parameters].
* [Paths] to [functions] and [constants].
  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.
* Paths to immutable [statics].

>     * Reads of [`extern` statics] are not allowed.

Reviewer 2: Reads from and writes to `static mut` and `static` with interior mutability are also not allowed.

And then there are restrictions on references that escape into the final value of the const/static. More precisely, this is about expressions that have been subject to lifetime extension, also see https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/pull/1637. Those references must also be of type `&T` and point to a value without an `UnsafeCell`.

And finally, specifically for `const` there also can't be any references to anything mutable in the final value.

Reviewer: Hm, I'm trying to unpack what you are saying here and align that with the current rules.

> Reads from and writes to `static mut` …

Isn't this implied by the fact that you are not allowed to refer to `static mut` at all by the rule that says paths only to *immutable* statics are allowed?

> Reads from and writes to [..] `static` with interior mutability are also not allowed.

Thanks, I have added that.

> And then there are restrictions on references that escape into the final value of the const/static.

Isn't this specified in the later rule that limits borrows of `UnsafeCell` that are transient? (That was my reading of it, and why I didn't say it explicitly.)

> And finally, specifically for `const` there also can't be any references to anything mutable in the final value.

Thanks, I have added that to the constant-items chapter.

Author: I actually have found the points mentioned down in the list here, in a bullet point starting with `All forms of [borrow]s, including raw borrows, with one limitation ...`. I think we have it covered.

Reviewer 2: > Isn't this specified in the later rule that limits borrows of UnsafeCell that are transient? (That was my reading of it, and why I didn't say it explicitly.)

Ah right, I forgot that those are already documented.

Reviewer: > That's not correct, referring to static mut is permitted.

OK, then I go back to my comment [earlier](https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/pull/1610#discussion_r1779733601) about why the word "immutable" is being added here.

I would think this PR shouldn't add the word *immutable*, and the edit @dingxiangfei2009 just added about not being allowed to read or write from `static mut` should cover everything?

(Because as written now, it says you can only do paths to immutable statics, but that does not seem to be true based on the playground above.)

Reviewer 2: Yeah you are right, `immutable` should not be mentioned here.

  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.

r[const-eval.const-expr.path-static]
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations.

>     * In particular, reads and writes to any `static`, `static mut` or [`extern` statics] is not allowed.

Reviewer 2: Reads from immutable statics are allowed.

    * Immutable borrows and pointers into immutable part of a `static` are allowed and observes the same restriction

>       on all other forms of [borrow]s as mentioned below.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't quite parse for me. I'm also not sure what the point of this bullet is -- is there any reason to not just entirely remove it?

>   * If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, then reads and writes to any mutable `static`, such as `static mut`s and `static`s containing an interior-mutable type.

Reviewer: Something (a verb?) seems to have been lost in this sentence. Maybe this?

```suggestion
  * If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, then reads and writes to any mutable `static`, such as `static mut`s and `static`s containing an interior-mutable type, are not allowed.
```

Reviewer 2: With writes being handled separately by my suggestion above, this can just say "reads from any mutable `static".

  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.

r[const-eval.const-expr.path-static]

> * Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions:
```
Sorry, just noticed this now. What are the "observations"?

Reviewer 2: I had a `:` in my suggestion here, which you turned back into a `.` for some reason -- seems odd to introduce a list with a `.` like this. It's not a big deal, I just wonder why you didn't simply click the button to apply my suggestion.

Author: Oh sorry. I did not notice that there was a change suggestion when reading the email. I would have just switch to colon.

  * Writes to `static` items are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.
  * Reads from `extern` statics are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.
  * If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item,
    then reads from any mutable `static` are not allowed.

>     A mutable `static` is a `static mut` item, or a `static` item with an interior-mutable type.

Author: Applied with edits.

>     A mutable `static` is a `static mut` item, or a `static` item with an interior-mutable type.

Reviewer 2: Ah unfortunately you copied my typo.^^ "accessed"...

  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.

r[const-eval.const-expr.path-static]
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations.

>   * In particular, reads and writes to any `static mut` or [`extern` statics] is not allowed.

Reviewer 4: So over in #1657, there is proposed language:

> Static initializers may refer to and even read from other statics.
> When reading from mutable statics, they read the initial value of that static.

The language in this PR seems contradictory to the language in that one, no?

Reviewer 2: Yeah this already works on stable
https://play.rust-lang.org/?version=stable&mode=debug&edition=2021&gist=59b79563db4fe5d5df26ab3f27cd4f1c

Reviewer: @RalfJung Can you write down exactly what we should say here? It would be helpful since we don't know exactly what the rules are. From looking at the implementation, I'm guessing, is it the `CanAccessMutGlobal` setting, which appears to be set only when in a static initializer? Does this need to say that you cannot read from `static mut` unless inside a static initializer, and that you can never write to a `static mut`, and that reading *and* writing `extern` statics always disallowed?

Reviewer 2: Yes:
- reads from mutable statics (`static mut`, and interior mutable `static`) are forbidden exception inside the initializer expression of a `static`/`static mut`
- writes to mutable statics are forbidden everywhere
- reads from and writes to extern static are forbidden everywhere

Author: I have updated the text just now, so that the cases for the two evaluation contexts are clearer.

  Recursively defining constants is not allowed.

r[const-eval.const-expr.path-static]
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations.

>   * If the evaluation is carried out in an initializer of a `const` item, or inside a `const` block, reads and writes to any `static mut` or [`extern` statics] are not allowed.

Reviewer 2: This is missing some things, like array lengths or enum discriminants. I wouldn't try to list them all. Instead, I would say "If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, ...".

Also, saying `static mut` is wrong since it fails to mention interior mutability. By summary carefully mentioned interior mutability. Please ensure your text matches my [summary](https://github.com/rust-lang/reference/pull/1610#discussion_r1830928182).

```suggestion
  * If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, then reads and writes to any mutable static (`static mut` or `static` with an interior mutable type) or [`extern` statics] are not allowed.
```

Author: Applied with edits. I am also reordering the bullets around.

>   * If the evaluation is carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, reads into a `static`, or inside `unsafe` blocks reads into `static mut` are allowed. Reads and writes to `extern` statics are still not allowed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If the evaluation is carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, *writes* to a mutable `static` are not allowed, but reads are allowed. Reads and writes to `extern` statics are still not allowed.
```

Author: Applied

r[const-eval.const-expr.path-static]
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations.

>   * Reads and writes to `extern` statics are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.
>   * If the evaluation is carried out in an initializer of a `static` item, then *writes* into mutable `static` are not allowed, such as `static mut`s and `static`s containing an interior-mutable type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Writes to `static` items are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.
  * Reads from `extern` statics are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.
```
I think that is simpler than what you have.

r[const-eval.const-expr.path-static]
* Paths to [statics] with these restrictions and observations.
  * Writes to `static` items are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.
  * Reads from `extern` statics are not allowed in any constant evaluation context.

>   * If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item,
>   then reads from any mutable `static` are not allowed.
>   By mutable `static` it includes `static mut`s and `static`s containing an interior-mutable type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If the evaluation is *not* carried out in an initializer of a `static` item,
    then reads from any mutable `static` are not allowed.
    A mutable `static` is a `static mut` item, or a `static` item with an interior-mutable type.
```

const generic parameter, or an arbitrary expression not making use of any
generics.

## Permitted use of `static`s

> Within the constant evaluation context, items that ultimately contain no mutable memory or data that is

Reviewer: I'm struggling to follow this section. It seems like you are allowed to borrow static mut items, as in:

```rust
const fn f() -> &'static u32 {
    static mut VALUE: u32 = 0;
    unsafe { &VALUE }
}

fn main() {
    let y = const { f() };
}
```

I can't really tell why it is not allowed in the initializer of a `const` as shown below. What is the rule there, and why is it different?

(I'm probably very confused, but the example above also seems to go against what the stabilization report says.)

Additionally, the stabilization report seems to make a distinction of *resulting* in a value that contains a reference to something mutable. (As opposed to merely accessing mutable statics within the course of evaluation, which seems to be allowed?)

Reviewer 2: > It seems like you are allowed to borrow static mut items, as in:

Yes, but you can't read from them. (It's also questionable whether this may be UB, but probably not worth explicitly making UB.)

> I can't really tell why it is not allowed in the initializer of a const as shown below. What is the rule there, and why is it different?

It is not allowed if the reference ends up in the final value of the const *as a safely readable reference*. (If it ends up as a raw pointer, or just inside a union, it's fine.) This is because such consts can be used as patterns, and patterns depending on mutable data would be Bad News.

Reviewer: Yea, sorry, I deleted my comment since I was more confused than I thought, and misunderstood how it worked.

capable of interior mutability can be used, borrowed or taken address of.
Among those are the `static` items as long as they are not actually `mut` items.

```rust
const fn allowed() -> &'static u32 {
    static VALUE: u32 = 0;
    &VALUE
}
const A_CONST: &'static u32 = allowed();
```

On the contrary, for example, `static mut` and types embedding an `UnsafeCell` is not allowed.

> ```rust,edition2021,compile_fail

Reviewer: `compile_fail` should usually have an E code to ensure the correct error is being emitted.

```suggestion
```rust,edition2021,compile_fail,E0080
```
